===PAGE 1===
PORTNOY"S 
COMPLAINT 
Philip Roth 
Portnoy's Complaint (port/'noiz kam-plant') n. [after Alexander Portnoy 
(1933" )] A disorder in which strongly-felt ethical and altruistic impulses 
are perpetually warring with extreme sexual longings, often of a perverse 
nature. Spielvogel says: 'Acts of exhibitionism, voyeurism, fetishism, auto-
eroticism and oral coitus are plentiful; as a consequence of the patient's 
"morality," however, neither fantasy nor act issues in genuine sexual 
gratification, but rather in overriding feelings of shame and the dread of 
retribution, particularly in the form of castration.' (Spielvogel, O. "The 
Puzzled Penis," Internationale Zeitschrift fur Psychoanalyse) Vol. XXIV p. 
909.) It is believed by Spielvogel that many of the symptoms can be traced 
to the bonds obtaining in the mother-child relationship. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THE MOST UNFORGETTABLE 
CHARACTER I'VE MET 
 
She was so deeply imbedded in my consciousness that for the first year 
of school I seem to have believed that each of my teachers was my mother 
in disguise. As soon as the last bell had sounded, I would rush off for home, 
wondering as I ran if I could possibly make it to our apartment before she 
had succeeded in transforming herself. Invariably she was already in the 
kitchen by the time I arrived, and setting out my milk and cookies. Instead 
of causing me to give up my delusions, however, the feat merely intensified 
my respect for her powers. And then it was always a relief not to have 

===PAGE 2===
caught her between incarnations anyway– even if I never stopped trying; I 
knew that my father and sister were innocent of my mother's real nature, 
and the burden of betrayal that I imagined would fall to me if I ever came 
upon her unawares was more than I wanted to bear at the age of five. I 
think I even feared that I might have to be done away with were I to catch 
sight of her flying in from school through the bedroom window, or making 
herself emerge, limb by limb, out of an invisible state and into her apron. 
Of course, when she asked me to tell her all about my day at 
kindergarten, I did so scrupulously. I didn't pretend to understand all the 
implications of her ubiquity, but that it had to do with finding out the kind 
of little boy I was when I thought she wasn't around-that was indisputable. 
One consequence of this fantasy, which survived (in this particular form) 
into the first grade, was that seeing as I had no choice, I became honest. 
Ah, and brilliant. Of my sallow, overweight older sister, my mother 
would say (in Hannah's presence, of course: honesty was her policy too), 
"The child is no genius, but then we don't ask the impossible. God bless 
her, she works hard, she applies herself to her limits, and so whatever she 
gets is all right." Of me, the heir to her long Egyptian nose and clever 
babbling mouth, of me my mother would say, with characteristic restraint, 
"This bonditt? He doesn't even have to open a book– 'A' in everything. 
Albert Einstein the Second!" 
And how did my father take all this? He drank– of course, not whiskey 
like a goy, but mineral oil and milk of magnesia; and chewed on Ex-Lax; 
and ate All-Bran morning and night; and downed mixed dried fruits by the 
pound bag. He suffered– did he suffer! – from constipation. Her ubiquity 
and his constipation, my mother flying in through the bedroom window, 
my father reading the evening paper with a suppository up his ass . . . 
these, Doctor, are the earliest impressions I have of my parents, of their 
attributes and secrets. He used to brew dried senna leaves in a saucepan, 
and that, along with the suppository melting invisibly in his rectum, 
comprised his witchcraft: brewing those vein green leaves, stirring with a 
spoon the evil-smelling liquid, then carefully pouring it into a strainer, and 
hence into his blockaded body, through that weary and afflicted expression 
on his face. And then hunched silently above the empty glass, as though 
listening for distant thunder, he awaits the miracle . . . As a little boy I 
sometimes sat in the kitchen and waited with him. But the miracle never 
came, not at least as we imagined and prayed it would, as a lifting of the 
sentence, a total deliverance from the plague. I remember that when they 
announced over the radio the explosion of the first atom bomb, he said 
aloud, "Maybe that would do the job." But all catharses were in vain for 
that man: his kishkas were gripped by the iron hand of outrage and 
frustration. Among his other misfortunes, I was his wife's favorite. 

===PAGE 3===
To make life harder, he loved me himself. He too saw in me the family's 
opportunity to be "as good as anybody," our chance to win honor and 
respect-though when I was small the way he chose to talk of his ambitions 
for me was mostly in terms of money. "Don't be dumb like your father," he 
would say, joking with the little boy on his lap, "don't marry beautiful, don't 
marry love-marry rich. "No, no, he didn't like being looked down upon one 
bit. Like a dog he worked-only for a future that he wasn't slated to have. 
Nobody ever really gave him satisfaction, return commensurate with goods 
delivered– not my mother, not me, not even my loving sister, whose 
husband he still considers a Communist (though he is a partner today in a 
profitable soft-drink business, and owns his own home in West Orange). 
And surely not that billion-dollar Protestant outfit (or "institution," as they 
prefer to think of themselves) by whom he was exploited to the full. 'The 
Most Benevolent Financial Institution in America" I remember my father 
announcing, when he took me for the first time to see his little square area 
of desk and chair in the vast offices of Boston & Northeastern Life. Yes, 
before his son he spoke with pride of "The Company"; no sense demeaning 
himself by knocking them in public-after all, they had paid him a wage 
during the Depression; they gave him stationery with his own name 
printed beneath a picture of the May flower, their insignia ( and by 
extension his, ha ha); and every spring, in the fullness of their benevolence, 
they sent him and my mother for a hotsy-totsy free weekend in Atlantic 
City, to a fancy goyische hotel no less, there (along with all the other 
insurance agents in the Middle Atlantic states who had exceeded the 
A.E.S., their annual expectation of sales) to be intimidated by the desk 
clerk, the waiter, the bellboy, not to mention the puzzled paying guests. 
Also, he believed passionately in what he was selling, yet another source 
of anguish and drain upon his energies. 
He wasn't lust saving his own soul when he donned his coat and hat after 
dinner and went out again to resume his work-no, it was also to save some 
poor son of a bitch on the brink of letting his insurance policy lapse, and 
thus endangering his family's security "in the event of a rainy day." "Alex," 
he used to explain to me, "a man has got to have an umbrella for a rainy 
day. You don't leave a wife and a child out in the rain without an umbrella!" 
And though to me, at five and six years of age, what he said made perfect, 
even moving, sense, that apparently was not always the reception his rainy-
day speech received from the callow Poles, and violent Irishmen, and 
illiterate Negroes who lived in the impoverished districts that had been 
given him to canvass by The Most Benevolent Financial Institution in 
America. 
They laughed at him, down in the slums. They didn't listen. They heard 
him knock, and throwing their empties against the door, called out, "Go 
away, nobody home." They set their dogs to sink their teeth into his 

===PAGE 4===
persistent Jewish ass. And still, over the years, he managed to accumulate 
from The Company enough plaques and scrolls and medals honoring his 
salesmanship to cover an entire wall of the long windowless hallway where 
our Passover dishes were stored in cartons and our "Oriental" rugs lay 
mummified in their thick wrappings of tar paper over the summer. If he 
squeezed blood from a stone, wouldn't The Company reward him with a 
miracle of its own? Might not "The President" up in "The Home Office" get 
wind of his accomplishment and turn him overnight from an agent at five 
thousand a year to a district manager at fifteen? But where they had him 
they kept him. Who else would work such barren territory with such 
incredible results? Moreover, there had not been a Jewish manager in the 
entire history of Boston & Northeastern ( Not Quite Our Class, Dear, as 
they used to say on the Mayflower), and my father, with his eighth-grade 
education, wasn't exactly suited to be the Jackie Robinson of the insurance 
business.  
N. Everett Lindabury, Boston & Northeastern's president, had his 
picture hanging in our hallway. The framed photograph had been awarded 
to my father after he had sold his first million dollars' worth of insurance, 
or maybe that's what came after you hit the ten-million mark. "Mr. 
Lindabury," 'The Home Office" . . . my father made it sound to me like 
Roosevelt in the White House in Washington . . . and all the while how he 
hated their guts, Lindabury's particularly, with his corn-silk hair and his 
crisp New England speech, the sons in Harvard College and the daughters 
in finishing school, oh the whole pack of them up there in Massachusetts, 
shkotzim fox-hunting! playing polo! (sol heard him one night, bellowing 
behind his bedroom door)– and thus keeping him, you see, from being a 
hero in the eyes of his wife and children. What wrath! What fury! And there 
was really no one to unleash it on-except himself. "Why can't I move my 
bowels– I'm up to my ass in prunes! Why do I have these headaches! 
Where are my glasses! Who took my hat!"  
In that ferocious and self-annihilating way in which so many Jewish men 
of his generation served their families, my father served my mother, my 
sister Hannah, but particularly me. Where he had been imprisoned, I 
would fly: that was his dream. Mine was its corollary: in my liberation 
would be his– from ignorance, from exploitation, from anonymity. To this 
day our destinies remain scrambled together in my imagination, and there 
are still too many times when, upon reading in some book a passage that 
impresses me with its logic or its wisdom, instantly, involuntarily, I think, 
"If only he could read this. Yes! Read, and understand– !" Still hoping, you 
see, still if– onlying, at the age of thirty-three . . . Back in my freshman year 
of college, when I was even more the son struggling to make the father 
understand– back when it seemed that it was either his understanding or 
his life I remember that I tore the subscription blank out of one of those 

===PAGE 5===
intellectual journals I had myself just begun to discover in the college 
library, filled in his name and our home address, and sent off an 
anonymous gift subscription. But when I came sullenly home at 
Christmastime to visit and condemn, the Partisan Review was nowhere to 
be found. Colliers, Hygeia, Look, but where was his Partisan Review? 
Thrown out unopened- I thought in my arrogance and heartbreak-
discarded unread, considered junk-mail by this schmuck, this moron, this 
Philistine father of mine!  
I remember-to go back even further in this history of disenchantment-I 
remember one Sunday morning pitching a baseball at my father, and then 
waiting in vain to see it go flying off, high above my head. I am eight, and 
for my birthday have received my first mitt and hardball, and a regulation 
bat that I haven't even the strength to swing all the way around. My father 
has been out since early morning in his hat, coat, bow tie, and black shoes, 
carrying under his arm the massive black collection book that tells who 
owes Mr. Lindabury how much. He descends into the colored 
neighborhood each and every Sunday morning because, as he tells me, that 
is the best time to catch those unwilling to fork over the ten or fifteen 
measly cents necessary to meet their weekly premium payments. He lurks 
about where the husbands sit out in the sunshine, trying to extract a few 
thin dimes from them before they have drunk themselves senseless on their 
bottles of "Morgan Davis" wine; he emerges from alleyways like a shot to 
catch between home and church the pious cleaning ladies, who are off in 
other people's houses during the daylight hours of the week, and in hiding 
from him on weekday nights. "Uh--oh," someone cries, "Mr. Insurance 
Man here!" and even the children run for cover– the children, he says in 
disgust, so tell me, what hope is there for these niggers' ever improving 
their lot? How will they ever lift themselves if they ain't even able to grasp 
the importance of life insurance? Don't they give a single crap for the loved 
ones they leave behind? Because "they's all" going to die too, you know-
"oh," he says angrily, " 'they she' is!' " Please, what kind of man is it, who 
can think to leave children out in the rain without even a decent umbrella 
for protection!  
We are on the big dirt field back of my school. He sets his collection book 
on the ground, and steps up to the plate in his coat and his brown fedora. 
He wears square steel-rimmed spectacles, and his hair (which now I wear) 
is a wild bush the color and texture of steel wool; and those teeth, which sit 
all night long in a glass in the bathroom smiling at the toilet bowl, now 
smile out at me, his beloved, his flesh and his blood, the little boy upon 
whose head no rain shall ever fall. "Okay, Big Shot Ballplayer," he says, and 
grasps my new regulation bat somewhere near the middle-and to my 
astonishment, with his left hand where his right hand should be. I am 
suddenly overcome with such sadness: I want to tell him, Hey, your hands 

===PAGE 6===
are wrong, but am unable to, for fear I might begin to cry-or he might! 
"Come on. Big Shot, throw the ball," he calls, and so I do– and of course 
discover that on top of all the other things I am just beginning to suspect 
about my father, he isn't "King Kong" Charlie Keller either. 
Some umbrella. 
 
It was my mother who could accomplish anything, who herself had to 
admit that it might even be that she was actually too good. And could a 
small child with my intelligence, with my powers of observation, doubt that 
this was so? She could make jello, for instance, with sliced peaches 
hanging in it, peaches just suspended there, in defiance of the law of 
gravity. She could bake a cake that tasted like a banana. Weeping, 
suffering, she grated he own horseradish rather than buy the pishachs they 
sold in a bottle at the delicatessen. She watched the butcher, as she put it, 
"like a hawk," to be certain that he did not forget to put her chopped meat 
through the kosher grinder. She would telephone all the other women in 
the building drying clothes on the back lines– called even the divorced goy 
on the top floor one magnanimous day– to tell them rush, take in the 
laundry, a drop of rain had fallen on our windowpane. What radar on that 
woman! And this is before radar! The energy on her! The thoroughness! 
For mistakes she checked my sums; for holes, my socks; for dirt, my nails, 
my neck, every seam and crease of my body. She even dredges the furthest 
recesses of my ears by pouring cold peroxide into my head. It tingles and 
pops like an earful of ginger ale, and brings to the surface, in bits and 
pieces, the hidden stores of yellow wax, which can apparently endanger a 
person's hearing. A medical procedure like this (crackpot though it may be) 
takes time, of course; it takes effort, to be sure-but where health and 
cleanliness are concerned, germs and bodily secretions, she will not spare 
herself and sacrifice others. She lights candles for the dead-others 
invariably forget, she religiously remembers, and without even the aid of a 
notation on the calendar. Devotion is just in her blood. She seems to be the 
only one, she says, who when she goes to the cemetery has "the common 
sense," "the ordinary common decency," to clear the weeds from the graves 
of our relatives. The first bright day of spring, and she has mothproofed 
everything wool in the house, rolled and bound the rugs, and dragged them 
off to my father's trophy room. She is never ashamed of her house: a 
stranger could walk in and open any closet, any drawer, and she would 
have nothing to be ashamed of. You could even eat off her bathroom floor, 
if that should ever become necessary. When she loses at mah-jongg she 
takes it like a sport, not-like-the-others-whose-names-she-could-mention-
but-she-won't-not-even-Tilly-Hochman-it's-too-petty-to-even- talk-about-
let’s-just-forget-she-even-brought -it- up. She sews, she knits, she darns– 
she irons better even than the schvartze, to whom, of all her friends who 

===PAGE 7===
each possess a piece of this grinning childish black old lady's hide, she 
alone is good. "I'm the only one who's good to her. I'm the only one who 
gives her a whole can of tuna for lunch, and I’m not talking dreck, either, 
I’m talking Chicken of the Sea, Alex. I'm sorry, I can't be a stingy person. 
Excuse me, but I can't live like that, even if it is 2 for 49  Esther 
Wasserberg leaves twenty-five cents in nickels around the house when 
Dorothy comes, and counts up afterwards to see it's all there. Maybe I'm 
too good," she whispers to me, meanwhile running scalding water over the 
dish from which the cleaning lady has just eaten her lunch, alone like a 
leper, "but I couldn't do a thing like that." Once Dorothy chanced to come 
back into the kitchen while my mother was still standing over the faucet 
marked H, sending torrents down upon the knife and fork that had passed 
between the schvartze's thick pink lips. "Oh, you know how hard it is to get 
mayonnaise off silverware these days, Dorothy," says my nimble-tongued 
mother– and thus, she tells me later, by her quick thinking, has managed 
to spare the colored woman's feelings.  
When I am bad I am locked out of the apartment. I stand at the door 
hammering and hammering until I swear I will turn over a new leaf. But 
what is it I have done? I shine my shoes every evening on a sheet of last 
night's newspaper laid carefully over the linoleum; afterward I never fail to 
turn securely the lid on the tin of polish, and to return all the equipment to 
where it belongs. I roll the toothpaste tube from the bottom, I brush my 
teeth in circles and never up and down, I say "Thank you," I say "You're 
welcome," I say "I beg your pardon," and "May I. " When Hannah is ill or 
out before supper with her blue tin can collecting for the Jewish National 
Fund, I voluntarily and out of my turn set the table, remembering always 
knife and spoon on the right, fork on the left, and napkin to the left of the 
fork and folded into a triangle. I would never eat milchiks off a flaishedigeh 
dish, never, never, never. Nonetheless, there is a year or so in my life when 
not a month goes by that I don't do something so inexcusable that I am told 
to pack a bag and leave. But what could it possibly be? Mother, it's me, the 
little boy who spends whole nights before school begins beautifully 
lettering in Old English script the names of his subjects on his colored 
course dividers, who patiently fastens reinforcements to a term's worth of 
three-ringed paper, lined and unlined both. I carry a comb and a clean 
hankie; never do my knicker stockings drag at my shoes, I see to that; my 
homework is completed weeks in advance of the assignment– let's face it, 
Ma, I am the smartest and neatest little boy in the history of my school! 
Teachers (as you know, as they have told you) go home happy to their 
husbands because of me. So what is it I have done? Will someone with the 
answer to that question please stand up! I am so awful she will not have me 
in her house a minute longer. When I once called my sister a cocky-doody, 
my mouth was immediately washed with a cake of brown laundry soap; 
this I understand. But banishment? What can I possibly have done! 

===PAGE 8===
Because she is good she will pack a lunch for me to take along, but then 
out I go, in my coat and my galoshes, and what happens is not her 
business.  
Okay, I say, if that's how you feel! (For I have the taste for melodrama 
too– I am not in this family for nothing. ) I don't need a bag of lunch! I 
don't need anything! 
I don't love you any more, not a little boy who behaves like you do. I'll 
live alone here with Daddy and Hannah, says my mother (a master really at 
phrasing things just the right way to kill you). Hannah can set up the mah-
jongg tiles for the ladies on Tuesday night. We won't be needing you any 
more. 
Who cares! And out the door I go, into the long dim hallway. Who cares! 
I will sell newspapers on the streets in my bare feet. I will ride where I want 
on freight cars and sleep in open fields, I think-and then it is enough for me 
to see the empty milk bottles standing by our welcome mat, for the 
immensity of all I have lost to come breaking over my head. "I hate you!" I 
holler, kicking a galosh at the door; "you stink!" To this filth, to this heresy 
booming through the corridors of the apartment building where she is 
vying with twenty other Jewish women to be the patron saint of self-
sacrifice, my mother has no choice but to throw the double-lock on our 
door. This is when I start to hammer to be let in. I drop to the doormat to 
beg forgiveness for my sin (which is what again?) and promise her nothing 
but perfection for the rest of our lives, which at that time I believe will be 
endless. 
Then there are the nights I will not eat. My sister, who is four years my 
senior, assures me that what I remember is fact: I would refuse to eat, and 
my mother would find herself unable to submit to such willfulness– and 
such idiocy. And unable to for my own good. She is only asking me to do 
something for my own good– and still I say no? Wouldn't she give me the 
food out of her own mouth, don't I know that by now? 
But I don't want the food from her mouth. I don't even want the food 
from my plate– that's the point. 
Please! a child with my potential! my accomplishments! my future!– all 
the gifts God has lavished upon me, of beauty, of brains, am I to be allowed 
to think I can just starve myself to death for no good reason in the world? 
Do I want people to look down on a skinny little boy all my life, or to look 
up to a man? 
Do I want to be pushed around and made fun of, do I want to be skin 
and bones that people can knock over with a sneeze, or do I want to 
command respect? 
Which do I want to be when I grow up, weak or strong, a success or a 
failure, a man or a mouse? 

===PAGE 9===
I just don't want to eat, I answer. 
So my mother sits down in a chair beside me with a long bread knife in 
her hand. It is made of stainless steel, and has little sawlike teeth. Which 
do I want to be, weak or strong, a man or a mouse? 
Doctor, why, why oh why oh why oh why does a mother pull a knife on 
her own son? I am six, seven years old, how do I know she really wouldn't 
use it? What am I supposed to do, try bluffing her out, at seven? I have no 
complicated sense of strategy, for Christ's sake– I probably don't even 
weigh sixty pounds yet! Someone waves a knife in my direction, I believe 
there is an intention lurking somewhere to draw my blood! Only why? 
What can she possibly be thinking in her brain? How crazy can she 
possibly be? Suppose she had let me win– what would have been lost? Why 
a knife, why the threat of murder, why is such total and annihilating 
victory necessary– when only the day before she set down her iron on the 
ironing board and applauded as I stormed around the kitchen rehearsing 
my role as Christopher Columbus in the third-grade production of Land 
Ho! I am the star actor of my class, they cannot put a play on without me. 
Oh, once they tried, when I had my bronchitis, but my teacher later 
confided in my mother that it had been decidedly second-rate. Oh how, 
how can she spend such glorious afternoons in that kitchen, polishing 
silver, chopping liver, threading pew elastic in the waistband of my little 
jockey shorts– and feeding me all the while my cues from the 
mimeographed script, playing Queen Isabella to my Columbus, Betsy Ross 
to my Washington, Mrs. Pasteur to my Louis– how can she rise with me on 
the crest of my genius during those dusky beautiful hours after school, and 
then at night, because I will not eat some string beans and a baked potato, 
point a bread knife at my heart? 
And why doesn't my father stop her? 
 
 
WHACKING OFF 
 
Then came adolescence-half my waking life spent locked behind the 
bathroom door, firing my wad down the toilet bowl, or into the soiled 
clothes in the laundry hamper, or splat, up against the medicine-chest 
mirror, before which I stood in my dropped drawers so I could see how it 
looked coming out. Or else I was doubled over my flying fist, eyes pressed 
closed but mouth wide open, to take that sticky sauce of buttermilk and 
Clorox on my own tongue and teeth-though not infrequently, in my 
blindness and ecstasy, I got it all in the pompadour, like a blast of Wildroot 
Cream Oil. Through a world of matted handkerchiefs and crumpled 

===PAGE 10===
Kleenex and stained pajamas, I moved my raw and swollen penis, 
perpetually in dread that my loathsomeness would be discovered by 
someone stealing upon me just as I was in the frenzy of dropping my load. 
Nevertheless, I was wholly incapable of keeping my paws from my dong 
once it started the climb up my belly. In the middle of a class I would raise 
a hand to be excused, rush down the corridor to the lavatory, and with ten 
or fifteen savage strokes, beat off standing up into a urinal. At the Saturday 
afternoon movie I would leave my friends to go off to the candy machine-
and wind up in a distant balcony seat, squirting my seed into the empty 
wrapper from a Mounds bar. On an outing of our family association, I once 
cored an apple, saw to my astonishment (and with the aid of my obsession) 
what it looked like, and ran off into the woods to fall upon the orifice of the 
fruit, pretending that the cool and mealy hole was actually between the legs 
of that mythical being who always called me Big Boy when she pleaded for 
what no girl in all recorded history had ever had. "Oh shove it in me, Big 
Boy," cried the cored apple that I banged silly on that picnic. "Big Boy, Big 
Boy, oh give me all you've got," begged the empty milk bottle that I kept 
hidden in our storage bin in the basement, to drive wild after school with 
my vaselined upright. "Come, Big Boy, come," screamed the maddened 
piece of liver that, in my own insanity, I bought one afternoon at a butcher 
shop and, believe it or not, violated behind a billboard on the way to a bar 
mitzvah lesson. 
It was at the end of my freshman year of high school-and freshman year 
of masturbating-that I discovered on the underside of my penis, just where 
the shaft meets the head, a little discolored dot that has since been 
diagnosed as a freckle. Cancer. I had given myself cancer. All that pulling 
and tugging at my own flesh, all that friction, had given me an incurable 
disease. And not yet fourteen! In bed at night the tears rolled from my eyes. 
"No!" I sobbed. "I don't want to die! Please-no!" But then, because I would 
very shortly be a corpse anyway, I went ahead as usual and jerked off into 
my sock. I had taken to carrying the dirty socks into bed with me at night 
so as to be able to use one as a receptacle upon retiring, and the other upon 
awakening. 
If only I could cut down to one hand-job a day, or hold the line at two, or 
even three! But with the prospect of oblivion before me, I actually began to 
set new records for myself. Before meals. After meals. During meals. 
Jumping up from the dinner table, I tragically clutch at my belly-diarrhea! 
I cry, I have been stricken with diarrhea!– and once behind the locked 
bathroom door, slip over my head a pair of underpants that I have stolen 
from my sister's dresser and carry rolled in a handkerchief in my pocket. So 
galvanic is the effect of cotton panties against my mouth– so galvanic is the 
word "panties"– that the trajectory of my ejaculation reaches startling new 
heights: leaving my joint like a rocket it makes right for the light bulb 
